      
-

      
California Management Review
2018, Vol. 60(2) 98–121
© The Regents of the
University of California 2017
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
hDtOtpIs::/1/d0o.1i.o1r7g7/1/00.01107871/200506811727536187276318261
journals.sagepub.com/home/cmr

      
SUMMARY
Innovative companies are building their business upon the participation of crowds.
These crowdsourcing business models are powerful because they are scalable. By
encouraging external innovators to contribute to value creation, crowdsourcing
innovation platforms have the capability to grow significantly in size and revenue
without equally increasing its costs. However, quickly and sustainably scaling
crowdsourcing platforms is a daunting challenge. This article considers more than
20 leading crowdsourcing ventures to identify scaling challenges and strategies.
The resulting framework presents scaling paths for managers of crowdsourcing
ventures as well as executives of traditional companies who seek to build scalable
crowdsourcing platforms.
consumers of products.6 Creators and customers interact around the value unit.
The value unit of crowdsourcing innovation platforms represents the innovation
outcome.7 The value unit can show varying degrees of elaboration, in relation to
the quality and kind of contribution the platform seeks. The strength of
crowdsourcing platforms is to deliver the value unit in a more efficient, effective,
reliable, personal, or faster way.

      
As a result, crowdsourcing business models can generate lucrative profits
without the budgetary strains that plague a traditional company-centric business
model.8 Look at what 99designs is doing to the traditional design process. Unlike
design agencies, 99designs does not employ any of the creative talent they use to
produce designs. Instead, 99designs’ platform connects customers seeking design
services to designers. They are claiming a large and growing share of the design
market from traditional design agencies. In the process, they have built an
enormous valuation in a startlingly short period.

      
These crowdsourcing companies grow faster, expand with lower marginal
cost, and generate substantial revenue because of the scalability of their business
model.9 The scalability advantages rest in several characteristics. First,
crowdsourcing platforms are decentralized. They rely on distributed decision making, spreading
accountability, and harnessing local knowledge.10 By exposing the innovation
problem to widely diverse individuals with varied skills, experience, and
perspectives, crowdsourcing can operate at a scale that exceeds the biggest and most
complex global corporations.11 Thanks to distributed resourcing, these platforms can
grow much faster than traditional businesses because they create value with their
community and do not own or control these resources.12 Second, crowdsourcing
often taps into a level of intrinsic motivation that traditional companies find difficult
to match. Incentives, such as salaries and bonuses, are not the primary drivers of
crowds. Contributors from the crowd self-select their challenges and draw
motivation from the joy of a creative task, learning, or the recognition they receive.13 The
third major factor of scale for crowdsourcing platforms is the cost effectiveness per
output, or per worker, compared with traditional companies. Crowdsourcing
businesses can expand production at minimal marginal costs. New users can create
new offerings without the platform incurring additional costs for production. The
properties of digital business models allow fixed costs to remain considerably lower.

      
Successful scaling can enhance the effectiveness of the platform, create
barriers to entry for competitors, realize innovation related benefits, and make the
venture financially viable.

      
Nevertheless, scaling up without screwing up is hard.14 In the startup
phase, crowdsourcing platforms fail for many reasons such as a lack of community
or struggling to build a viable business model. However, there is a growing list of
companies that have a large community and are creating value through
crowdsourcing, but that fail to scale. Quirky, the collaborative invention platform that
was praised for its powerful crowdsourcing model, provides a cautionary tale. The
platform was one of the most promising startups and quickly attracted several
hundred thousand community members, which produced a considerable number
of products marketed online and through large retailers. It promised to
revolutionize the manufacturing process by democratizing the effort and empowering
their community of inventors. Their success, however, was short-lived. The model
broke at scale.15

      
How can companies effectively scale up a crowdsourcing platform? To
answer this question, we need an organized way to think about scaling
strategies. Without a framework for identifying scaling opportunities, it is hard to be
systematic about the process. As a result of an examination of the scaling efforts
of leading crowdsourcing platforms, this article offers such a framework. It helps
traditional companies that are experimenting with crowdsourcing to envision
potential paths for scaling their crowdsourcing initiatives. Existing
crowdsourcing ventures can learn from the challenges and strategies of large-scale
crowdsourcing ventures.

    

      
Scaling Crowdsourcing Platforms

      
Let us first briefly define scaling. For the crowdsourcing platform context,
we use the term to describe the process of significantly increasing the quality and
quantity of value-creating interactions among platform actors, without equally
increasing the costs, to result in increased value capture. Our definition implies
that scaling is conceptually different from growth, even though the terms are
often used synonymously. Growing means that companies add resources at the
same rate as they add revenue. Scaling, in general, is about adding revenue at
an exponential rate, while only adding resources at an incremental rate.16 When
a crowdsourcing platform adds participants at a quick pace while they increase
very few additional resources to service those members, they are scaling up.17
Crowdsourcing innovation platforms that operate on a large scale achieved
critical mass of both creators and customers to produce a constant stream of
innovation.18 Our definition excludes organizational scaling, although it will be
required for exponential growth of a platform.19 This study is concerned with the
particularities of crowdsourcing innovation platforms. It also excludes
technological scalability, which describes the capability of a system to cope and perform
under an increased or expanding workload.20 While the technology underlying
a crowdsourcing site needs to be scalable, scaling platforms are not primarily a
technological challenge, and managers need to make the necessary choices to
leverage the technological affordances to scale effectively.21

      

        
Scaling Pipelines versus Crowdsourcing Platforms

        
To understand how scaling crowdsourcing platforms differs from
traditional businesses, we use the metaphor of pipeline versus platform business
introduced by Parker et al.22 Most traditional companies resemble pipelines. They
create value by controlling a linear series of activities. For pipelines, the
company is the producer of innovation on one end, and the customers’ role is to
use the value unit at the other end. For innovation platforms, in contrast, a
company’s role shifts to enable interactions with external innovators, who create or
co-create innovation. Platform interactions encourage the creation, exchange,
and consumption of innovation in a variety of ways. Contrasting pipelines and
platforms explains the ability of crowdsourcing platforms to scale rapidly:
•
•
•

        
From supply-side to demand-side economies of scale: In the past, business was
defined in part by an intense desire for organizational growth. Traditional
pipeline companies rely on supply-side economies of scale.23 These companies
realize a cost advantage by spreading fixed costs over an increasing number
of units of output and thereby decreasing costs per unit.24 However,
crowdsourcing platforms are driven by demand-side economies of scale, or so-called
network effects. The value created and the profit margins of the platform
owner both increase as more users join the ecosystem.25 Threadless, the
T-shirt crowdsourcing platform, is a classic example. More T-shirt designers
attract more customers, which in turn attract more artists. The more crowd
members are engaged, the higher the average value per transaction.
Furthermore, turning consumers into co-creators is a low-cost method of acquiring
customers, which often leads to viral user acquisition by empowering users
as marketers.26 Hence, crowdsourcing platforms can be lean rather than large.
From optimizing value chains to orchestrating innovation networks: Pipeline
businesses create value by controlling the traditional value chain. They focus on
optimization to increase operation effectiveness and control resources. In
contrast, crowdsourcing platforms do not optimize a traditional value chain.
Rather, they enable value-creating users to connect with customers. A
pipeline business that designs and makes a product at one end of the pipe, and
delivers to a customer at the other end, is limited by inefficient gatekeepers
to manage the flow of value from the producer to the consumer. Consider
how this approach plays out at a pipeline clothing manufacturer: internal
gatekeepers select a few items from many designs and hope the ones
chosen will prove popular. By contrast, Threadless relies on community signals
to determine which shirts will succeed. The crowdsourcing platform scales
more rapidly and efficiently because market signals replace traditional
internal gatekeepers.

        
From resource control to external sourcing: In decades past, the core values of legacy
institutions were isolation and closed secret innovation processes. Large R&D
teams were valuable assets and created barriers to entry for competitors.
However, value creation is not about the resources per se, but rather lies in the
ability to access, deploy, exchange, and combine them.27 Crowdsourcing platforms
unlock new sources of value creation and supply. Internal design resources
do not confine Threadless’s growth. It can increase its inventory of T-shirts by
harnessing contributions from the crowd of 120,000 designers. The crowds’
contributions can be monetized at very low marginal cost, and Threadless can
scale rapidly and efficiently, with minimal structural restrictions. This structure
allows crowdsourcing businesses to grow revenue with relatively small
operating costs, and without the organizational overhead of traditional companies.

        
The community and its members’ resources are the critical assets.

      

      

        
Getting Ready to Scale

        
Sutton and Rao’s28 assertion that to scale excellence, you have to have
excellence to scale, also applies to crowdsourcing platforms. The following
building blocks of crowdsourcing platforms are scaling prerequisites29:
•
•
•
•

        
Existence of sizable platform actors: Crowdsourcing platforms are multi-sided.30
The company is the platform owner and the intermediary between creators
and customers. Before scaling, platforms must lay out a compelling value
proposition for both sides so that creators and customers derive significant
value on a consistent basis. During the evolution of crowdsourcing platforms,
there is an initial period of slow growth while the platform tries to attract first
participants. Once critical mass is achieved and the platform creates value for
an increasing number of participants, managers can turn their attention to
scaling.

        
Effective core interaction: The core interaction is the key activity the platform
actors repeatedly perform to create value. The core interaction consists of
three actions: creation, curation, and consumption. They are divided among
the platform actors of the company, creators, and customers. Platforms need
to resist the temptation to accelerate growth before figuring out the core
interaction where creators are engaged in creation and customers are happy
to use the outcomes of the creation.

        
Efficient creation of value unit: The value unit represents the outcome created
on the platform, whether it is content, information, products, services, or
designs. Crowdsourcing platforms need to prove that they can produce the
value unit in better or cheaper ways than traditional pipeline businesses. The
value unit results from the core interaction.

        
Evidence of potentially substantial value capture: No crowdsourcing platform is
ready to scale until it can show at least the prospect for monetization.
Premature growth can reduce the probability of reaching the inflection point that
triggers exponential growth.31 The core interaction shapes the type of
business model.32

      

      

        
Why Scale Matters

        
Why scale? First, scale can enhance the effectiveness of crowdsourcing
platforms because of the interdependencies among participants who take on creator
and consumer roles. Hence, the value of the platform increases as more people
engage in value-creating interactions. For instance, InnoCentive, the
crowdsourcing problem-solving site, enhances the matching between solution seekers
and solvers with more participants on both sides of the platform. Once
crowdsourcing platforms reach an inflection point, network effects take effect, and
growth follows an exponential trajectory.33 Because scaling creates powerful
network effects, scale trumps differentiation.34 Second, scaling is also important
defensively to create barriers to entry for competitors. Due to the increasing ease
and decreasing cost of launching a startup, as soon as a new venture becomes
successful, it has to race against dozens of copycats.35 In addition,
crowdsourcing platforms often operate in winner-takes-all markets (or winner-takes-most
markets),36 because the likelihood for a single crowdsourcing platform in one
category increases when users value the ability to interact with large numbers
of other users. Once the crowd and customers begin interacting on a
particular crowdsourcing platform, it becomes harder for a rival to lure them away.
Scaling too slowly is particularly dangerous in a business with network effects
because if a platform does not scale up fast enough, competitors will.37 Leading
crowdsourcing platforms need to capture first-mover advantages and succeed in
winner-takes-all markets by scaling up the crowd and building an active
community as a core asset of their business model. Even if competitors can easily
copy the underlying technology, the community is difficult to imitate. Third, a
large-scale crowd has innovation related benefits. A large user base enhances the
idea diversity,38 which in turn increases the probability that ideas will be more
valuable to contest sponsors.39 It also increases the possibility to generate novel
solutions that internal experts did not previously consider.40 Finally, a
crowdsourcing business may require a certain scale to be financially viable. Especially,
two-sided marketplace models must have both creators and customers at scale to
enable monetization.41 Venture capital investments in crowdsourcing companies
indicate the urge to scale quickly. We can see this clearly in the crowdsourcing
design sector. Crowdsourcing startups like Fiverr ($111M), 99designs ($45M), or
DesignCrowd ($11M) attracted significant investments from venture funds.42

        
Crowdsourcing offers the potential for scalable business models with
longterm advantages. However, the fact that circumstances make it possible for a
crowdsourcing platform to scale does not mean that it will. Scale has its limits and
presents several challenges. Scaling can create friction if the complexity of value
creation increases excessively or the quality of the innovation outcome suffers.
While the technology underlying a crowdsourcing platform is easier to scale, the
people involved in crowdsourcing require coordination costs. Despite the visibility
and importance of the relatively young crowdsourcing companies that have
achieved global scale, our understanding of the challenges involved and insights
on how to quickly and sustainably scale up platforms is limited.43

      

    

      
Research Method

      
To identify the most effective actions in scaling crowdsourcing platforms,
we analyzed more than 20 leading crowdsourcing platforms and conducted
interviews with platform managers (n = 36) (Table 1). Three main criteria guided
the selection of cases. First, we chose cases where crowdsourcing is the core of
a company, and the platform acts as a standalone venture, rather than
timelimited and isolated crowdsourcing projects. Second, we focused on innovation
platforms that create something new, rather than exchange platforms that
facilitate transactions of existing resources. The value units range from ideas
(solutions to innovation challenges) to design (graphic and product design) to creative
content (visual advertising content). Third, we looked for scaleups rather than
startups. Scaleups, in general, are companies growing consistently and
significantly.44 In the crowdsourcing context, it means that a platform reached
critical mass on both the creator and customer side, and the venture validated their
business model. To estimate their scale, we identified key metrics around the
quantity and quality of the platform’s value unit and the number of participants.
We included platforms that failed to scale despite their intention to understand
their challenges.45

      

        For the first step of data collection, we interviewed executives of the
crowdsourcing ventures about their business model as well as issues and plans related to
scaling
        
(business model and scaling interviews, 2015, n = 15)

        . In a second step, we
followed up with one or more in-depth scaling interviews to learn about the
platform’s scaling progress and added cases that experienced substantial growth
(indepth scaling interviews, 2016-2017, n = 21). The interview data were
complemented through reports and publicly available material to create timelines
of how the platform evolved. Each interview was recorded, transcribed, and coded
with the software Dedoose. Pursuing the goal to obtain deep insights into the
topic, we opted for an inductive open coding process typical for a grounded theory
approach.46 We moved from specific observations to a broader generalization and
placed labels on responses that described discrete challenges and strategies.
      

    

      
Scaling Paths and Strategies

      
How can crowdsourcing platforms scale? Our findings reveal that
crowdsourcing platforms can scale up along three paths:
•

      
Actors: When platforms launch, they initially need to focus on a narrow set
of participants to achieve critical mass on both sides of the platform. To fuel
scaling along this first path means bringing new creators and customers to the
platform or increasing the participation of current actors.
• Interactions: Many successful platforms begin with a single core interaction
that consistently generates high value for users and makes the emergence
of network effects possible. Platforms can scale up by focusing on
increasing the value and volume of their existing core interaction or adding new
interactions.
•

      
Value units: Platforms start with producing a single value unit. Increasing the
value of the core value unit or adding new value units is the third promising
scaling path.

      
These paths can be chosen individually or together, and a variety of
combinations can work effectively under the right circumstances. “We have to scale on
multiple fronts,”47 said one founder of a crowdsourcing design site. Another
agreed: “Scaling is one of these funny things where you’re always just fixing the
weakest point.”48 Our study of the leading crowdsourcing platforms suggests that
scaling strategies come in eight distinct forms (Figure 1). We discuss each one
te 3
n = 4 2 2 1 1 1 2 1 2 — 2 1
I
s s s s s s s s s s
trraeo trsexEp trsexEp trsexEp irsgeen irsgeen irsgeen irsgeen irsgeen irsgeen irsgeen irsgeen irsgeen

      
D D D D D D D D D
C
.sw itn isgen isgen isgen isgen isgen isgen (+m isgen isgen
iItrveen laeuU Isaed Isaed Isaed trcuddo trcuddo trcuddo trcuddo trcuddo trcuddo iiscgend ircahdp ircahdp

      
V P P P P P P h G G
d p
n ra
a
G
s
e
s
a

      
)
C 2
f 2

      
=
o
b.l1eitsL (yapnomN itcaeennnooC itveennoC iigaSenm lrssaeehd airyku syaaehpw ltrscaoooM tsaeudomM rrzcaab irrve btraeunndoTm lrsguh8ooo
a C Id In N T Q S L C A F A 4
T
.
o
N
n = 3 3 3 1 — 2 1 1 1 1 1
I

      
)
th 7

      
1
w 0
o 2
r (
G r
f o
ie tc
h ) e

      
r
,C 17

      
i
) 0 D
6 2 g
)r 10 r( it

      
n
aeY t(n2 fifceO rkae )610
( e g M 2

      

        , (
iItrveenw iliftttrrrccagvSeeeepoooDm fi,iifft()rrckaeeehn1702CMO ,it()(r)seenE20152017dCO ,,(r)enu015202162170do f-r()enu2071doo lit]ssycaaennuoDm ,ll(r)scaFeeehE20
        
15oCwO itr()rsaehn2016

        pPP it()rseen2016d itttrr()rycagSee2016o ifiifftrr()ckageeenh0126MO )(E5102O
      

      
D P F C [ R V P D C C
s
r
e s s s s s s s s s s s

      
t t t t t t t t t t t
m n n n n n n n n n n n
to lie ile ile ile lie ile ile lie lie lie lie
s C C C C C C C C C C C
s s s s s s s s s s .
irgen irgen irgen irgen itave itave itave itave itave itave itsan
s s s s e e e e e e su i.t
e e e e r r r r r r
D D D D C C C C C C ro ve
e
le i
h
e te
bu to

      
g
e n
la it
sc p

      
m
d e
e t
v t
ie a
h e
c r
a a
G

      
a t t

      
IN ty a a
rcedpooT itrsedoCw rcSdPoRw IaeundBo kaeeY filomM attenpPo lganoT frrsaeUm appooZ lfttsrahom lfttsrahom
aP bP
along with the challenges that trigger the strategy and the decisions involved in
choosing a scaling approach.

      

        
Curate Existing Creators

        
Crowdsourcing can get too crowded. During scaling, difficulties can result
from a rapid increase in users. Scaling can rapidly turn into diseconomies of scale
if the costs of coordinating creators are bigger than the additional value created
by them. In the case of Quirky, for instance, a product team frequently exceeded
8,000 users, and all of them were rewarded with influence for their contributions
to the tasks from idea generation to product launch. The creation process suffered
because it was distributed among too many creators. Hence, scaling should
optimize rather than maximize the number of creators. “We need the right number,
not a high number per se,”49 Topcoder’s marketing director acknowledges. After
the crowd size reaches critical mass, the focus shifts from attracting users to
curating them. Platforms must have qualified and motivated participants who can
produce the outcome companies want. There are three main ways of doing this.

        
First, platforms at scale should screen creators to ensure a minimum quality
threshold and to vet and certify participants. Especially, contest platforms seek the
minimally efficient set of users available to solve the problem and not to waste
their time. In line with the suggestion to “slow down to scale fast—and better—
down the road,”50 CrowdSPRING stopped registration for new designers to
reexamine how and to whom they grant access. They realized the excess costs of too
many creators and asked for identification based on government IDs. The CEO
also shared other measures with us:

        
For certain categories on crowdSPRING, including logo design, web design, and
naming, we asked them for samples of their work and we would approve them
to participate in those categories only if those samples met our standards for
quality. So, in the roughly six months that registration was closed, we had
something like 10,000 people on the waitlist. We are a ten-year-old company, and still
see close to 2,000 designers and writers a month registering to work on
crowdSPRING.51

        
Automating screening is required for large-scale sites. An illustrative
example is 99designs. They use technology to verify users’ identity, remove duplicated
entries, and report unwanted behavior. Another example for curating creators
comes from IdeaConnection, a team-based crowdsourcing innovation platform.
Its SolverTeams Solutions assembles curated teams of creators through artificial
intelligence to solve innovation challenges.

        
Second, platforms need to cultivate desired behavior to build the skills of creators
and develop desired crowd behavior. User profiles and rankings are important
features to keep participants reliable and honest. They also convey status, which can
satisfy the members’ desire to receive recognition. Topcoder—a community platform
for competitive designers, developers, data scientists, and architects—encourages
desired behaviors by offering a reliability bonus for participants who are consistent

        
Paths and strategies to scale crowdsourcing platforms.

        

          
ACTORS

        

        

          
INTERACTIONS

        

        

          
VALUE UNITS

          
CREATORS
CUSTOMERS

        

        

          
Curate existing creators

          
crowdSPRING controlling access and enabling
designers to get better

        

        

          
Attract new creators

          
InnoCentive attracting skilled creators for new
innovation challenges

        

        

          
Deepen relationship with existing customers

          
Tongal adding consulting services to serve large
clients on an ongoing basis

        

        

          
Acquire new customers

          
Topcoder tapping into existing pool of customers
by joining an IT service company

        

        

          
Replicate core interaction

          
Arcbazar removing frictions to repeat contests
more frequently

        

        

          
Add new interactions

          
Local Motors adding complementary interaction to
extend integrator platform as two-sided platform

        

        

          
Increase value of core value unit

          
Poptent moving up-market to produce videos for
TV instead of online channels

        

        

          
Extend to new value units

          
99designs adding web design in addition to logo
design to access larger market
with responding and delivering their contribution. Others include reciprocal voting,
where creators and customers rate each other. This exchange of social currency is a
signal of quality and builds the reputation that enables future interactions.

          
Third, large-scale sites can create sub-communities. Consider the coordination
efforts of more than a million design and technology experts or the task of
activating enough creators to continuously deliver high-quality solutions to clients. To
reduce the coordination costs and leverage the benefits of community, platforms
can segment large crowds into sub-communities. This strategy was pioneered by
open source communities to scale many-to-many interactions and is increasingly
adopted by large-scale crowdsourcing platforms. Let us look at how one platform
segments their community. Topcoder creates smaller groups for certain topics
because “it drives better fulfillment rates around the next unit of work by having
the right mix of talent and the right volume of participants around that unit.”
Sub-communities allow for more “niche messaging within those communities
and creates happier customers.”52 Platforms can empower their top creators to
become group leaders of sub-communities. IdeaConnection leverages facilitators
from the community to coordinate the groups who compete in their challenges.
“They handle most of the sort of mundane day-to-day of answering questions,
organizing meetings, all of that kind of stuff,” says IdeaConnection’s president.
“So as we scale up, all we need is more facilitators and it doesn’t cause us too
much more work.”53

        

      

      

        
Attract New Creators

        
Platforms can scale by bringing in additional creators that are capable of
solving new innovation challenges. Consider that InnoCentive now covers a
broad spectrum of innovation challenges from chemistry, physics, science,
engineering, and consumer products to social innovation. Their co-founder explains
their organic approach to acquire new creators: “As we post challenges in new
domains, we grow our solver base as there is a high likelihood that many of
our over 375,000 solvers recruit from their personal networks capable in the
new domain.”54 To attract skilled creators, it is helpful to consider the motives
of money, love, and glory55 because platform managers are “not here to judge
what’s valuable to an individual; we are here to offer the right mixture of
incentives for people.”56
•
•

        
Share value captured: When the platform owner’s revenue increases, crowd
contributors will increasingly demand money. The former president of
Topcoder points out that money has gained in importance over time for their
community members: “The members are participating directly in the value
capture; they are the source of the value that is being provided in the
community.”57 The tension between crowd value creation versus platform owner
value capture can be a source of conflict. Crowdsourcing platforms at scale
need to adjust their initial value co-capture mechanism that satisfied the early
adaptors. Threadless has done an outstanding job in this regard. While the
platform initially relied on a prize money approach, they recently shifted to a
revenue sharing model and increased the percentage rate artists receive as a
form of compensation. To ensure ongoing crowd production, crowdsourcing
sites need to create systems that involve the crowd in value creation as well
as value capture. There are caveats to this recommendation. On the quest for
scalable incentives, platform leaders need to be aware of the curse of cash
incentives. Financial incentives are costly and might crowd out intrinsic
motivation. Providing a viable reward for contributors is more complicated than
providing monetary incentives, and a systems view is needed to balance out
monetary and nonmonetary incentives. The CEO of eYeka, a creative
content and idea crowdsourcing site, explained that by keeping prize money low,
they avoid it becoming the primary driver for their community members:
We want the freshness; the people who see collaborating with brands as a fun and
meaningful activity. The financial motivation should be secondary. The first
motivation is about self-expression and fulfilment of your creative potential and
learning from feedback.58
Provide recognition from multiple sources: Oversized communities are problematic
for glory because users might go unnoticed or no longer get the attention they
feel they deserve for their creative contributions.59 How can platform leaders
provide recognition as the crowd grows? First, technical features can
automatically provide credit. For instance, Topcoder leverages gamification
tactics, such as ranking members and showcasing the core members’ status with
badges. Second, recognition can come from other sources than the platform
owner. Creators on 99designs benefit from accumulating acknowledgment
from their peers and achieving status in the community. Third, the company
can use their platform not only to create products, but also to showcase their
community members. Blogs, awards, and events are viable mechanisms to
accomplish that. Although initiatives like events are very useful to provide
recognition, they might fail to scale because of the costs involved and the
limited reach. Topcoder transitioned from one large Topcoder Open in San
Francisco to decentralized smaller events in major markets.60 For the creators with
a desire to enhance their professional and personal identity, offering
challenges by leading brands is a practical approach. For instance, Tongal (content
creation platform) grows their creators by involving well-known clients.
Preserve the love: When a platform quickly adds new users and faces pressure to
grow revenue, protecting creators’ intrinsic motivation, or love, can be difficult.
Platforms must preserve the community’s passion that drove the platform’s
early growth. Many creators are driven by a desire for learning and skill
development. Crowdsourcing ventures should build upon this motive to stimulate
creators’ interests. In line with the shift from an initial focus on crowd growth
to enhancing the quality of the crowd, strategies should focus on providing
learning resources and connecting creators with each other for peer learning.

      

      

        
Deepen Relationship with Existing Customers

        
Thriving platforms have enough customers to make it worthwhile for
creators to create. A lack of customers will discourage creators, and the platform will
collapse. Consumption takes many forms: from paying attention to the
submitted ideas to paying for the products created by the crowd. Crowdsourcing contest
sites realize that in order to scale, they need to increase the volume of business
with existing clients. The president of the failed video crowdsourcing site Poptent
admitted that rather than chasing one-time transactions, they should have
focused on repeat business from existing clients:

        
Going slower, we might have gotten to a 20 or 25 million dollar shop, but the only
way we could do it is by doing a lot of repeat business with the customers we had
and trying to manage that with fewer or more productive sales folks.61

        
Their failure is a helpful reminder about the importance of preventing
expenses from growing faster than sales. There are many ways a platform can
boost sales from existing clients. Let us look at the most important.

        
One approach that aims to make crowdsourcing a more prominent choice
for how to source innovation is to add services to serve large clients. The biggest
growth opportunity for crowdsourcing sites is to take volume away from
traditional ways to source ideas, designs, or products. Many content-oriented
platforms mimic full-service agencies that large brands are familiar with by offering
supporting services. Their challenge is the transition from being perceived by
brands as an experiment to fill content gaps or test budgets, to being the preferred
choice for all kinds of content creation. Hence, Tongal and others focus on
deepening their relationships with top clients to enhance the lifetime value of their
customers. They provide comprehensive service to companies by guiding them
from content strategy to execution, rather than by running an isolated crowd
contest for them. The challenge for the crowdsourcing platform is to remove the
friction from the interaction “because the brands, unlike agencies, are not used to
work directly with content creators and they are afraid of how to do it.”62 For
example, eYeka aims to be included in the protocols of big brands to generate
recurring demand, and Mofilm focuses on large corporations that manage
multiple brands. However, a consulting service model bears the risks of excessive costs
required to develop customized solutions compared with the self-service model.
That said, some crowdsourcing platforms might manage to achieve the holy grail
of providing self-service for small clients and strategy consulting for large clients
to grow across client segments.

        
To achieve the vision of InnoCentive’s co-founder that companies “will
start using this as an integral part of their basic innovation and development
processes,”63 crowdsourcing platforms need to address client concerns. Concerns by
many companies refer to the uncertainty of the innovation outcome or the
crowd’s reliability. Hence, platforms must put mechanisms in place to ensure that
participants have little or no fear when using the site. Satisfaction guarantees
serve as insurance for clients to reduce the consumption risk. Clients on
IdeaConnection are expected to pay only if the crowd has delivered an acceptable
solution for them. An alternative solution is to provide more direct and focused
interactions with the crowd members. Another source of discomfort for clients is
losing control over the creation process. Forward thinking platforms like Tongal
realize that brand alignment is critical for the satisfaction of their clients. Clients
struggle to give up control over their brand and if the platform does not provide
some mechanism for brand control, it can fail. However, a client’s need for
control must be balanced with creators’ freedom. This is one of the most difficult
design decisions because it involves features that put the different platform actors
at odds with each other.64 Platforms need to manage this trade-off in a way that
does not offend the community but still satisfies the clients’ needs. Given the
relative scarcity of clients and their importance for the platform’s long-term
success, managers should optimize their processes for customers. Other concerns are
related to legal issues such as intellectual property rights and confidentiality.
Topcoder educates clients on their privacy policies and intellectual property
assignment rules. They allow clients to keep their company names anonymous
during competitions and help them generate test data sets to avoid the exposure
of sensitive information.65

        
Once an initial innovation challenge is successful, platforms should encourage
and help their clients share the success internally. Topcoder’s marketing director explains:
It is worthy to think about scale that way: If you’ve got the right client, the right
person, then do what you can to help them showcase it internally. Just do
everything you possibly can, to make their lives easier. 66

        
Sharing the success can move a company from running a single challenge
“into someone that is engaged year-round for many years to come” by helping the
client’s champion “stand on an innovation soapbox and be like ‘Hey we did this
really impressive virtual thing in an alternative way.’”66

      

      

        
Acquire New Customers

        
The lack of demand is the most reoccurring issue throughout our
conversations with the executives of client-oriented crowdsourcing platforms.
Demand rather than supply constrains scaling efforts. Idea Bounty, a creative
crowdsourcing site, is a case in point. In a post-mortem letter, the team
admitted that they failed because they could not attract enough clients, despite
1,000 creatives ready to solve the challenges broadcasted by companies.
Clients chose traditional advertising agencies over the riskiness of an idea born
of an independent crowd member. In a similar fashion, Topcoder had to
contend with the demand side as the bottleneck to scale. The CEO recalls the key
insight that they could not build a large-scale business upon the early adopters
in niche markets:

        
From a traditional perspective, it was a healthy business. But it was nowhere near
what was needed to feed the community. Our community was growing. They
were hungry and we were not able to keep up with getting into customers to feed
the community.

        
Topcoder concluded that the “market was not ready,” and it decided “to go
to the market” by joining an IT service company in order to capture a share of
their work.67

        
For crowdsourcing platforms to thrive, both sides of the platform need to
grow proportionally. One strategic move to acquire new customers is to expand
geographically. To achieve critical mass in a narrow market, many crowdsourcing
platforms initially focus on one geographic region that contains both creation and
consumption activity. However, this small market should be representative of the
overall market. Consider how Crowdsite, a graphic design crowdsourcing
platform, started in their home market in the Netherlands. In this micro-market, the
competition was limited. After successfully establishing the venture on their home
turf, they expanded to Germany and recently to the United States. 99design
decided to conquer the U.S. market, rather than their home market because of the
volume of potential clients. Internationalization often requires language
translations to reduce barriers. Premature geographic expansion can be a stumbling
block on a platform’s scaling path. Take, for example, the case of Poptent. Their
expansion to South America created too many complications when they offered
an English and a Portuguese version and also confronted cultural differences in
recruiting platform participants.68 Partnerships with local communities of
creatives helped Tongal address the quality issues associated with international
expansion. 99designs scaled quickly in Europe through an acquisition with an
existing multilingual crowd design site.

        
Piggybacking on existing networks of customers is a cost-effective way to grow the
customer base. Crowdsourcing ventures have been successful with creating
partnerships that provide them access to companies or agencies that are already
working with a great number of brands. For Fiverr, a crowdsourcing platform for creative
services, tapping into existing networks of business owners has played a critical role
in unleashing their scaling power. They collaborated with a New York Chamber of
Commerce event to reach 30,000 small business owners and used PayPal as a
channel to reach 12 million users around the world with a special promotion.

        
Another approach to scale consumption is to offer the value unit through
different distribution channels. Online, this could mean spreading the creations through
widgets or offering the crowdsourced products across various sites. For example,
48hourslogo, a crowdsourcing site focused on logo design, provides a white label
version of their platform so that other companies can integrate the crowdsourcing
process on their website. The result is more exposure for designers, which
stimulates creation. Userfarm’s social media package allows a one-click upload of social
videos on the client’s Facebook page in addition to their platform. Prominent
offline strategies to establish additional consumption outlets are retail
partnerships. Think about how Threadless succeeded in diffusing the crowd’s designs by
teaming up with distribution partners like GAP. In these cases, crowdsourcing
platforms can often enjoy synergies resulting from the massive reach of
established brands and their extensive marketing activities.

      

      

        
Replicate Core Interaction

        
Many successful platforms scale well by increasing the volume of their
existing interaction before they extend their user base or add interactions. The
crowdsourcing architecture platform Arcbazar follows just this pattern. For them,
“scaling means running 100, or 1000, competitions simultaneously.”69 To boost
the frequency of the core interaction, reducing friction is the first order of
business. The core interaction spans creation, curation, and consumption.
•
•

        
Creation: When platforms scale, it is almost always connected to creeping
complexity. While the dominant words in scaling conversation are usually about
addition, scaling crowdsourcing requires reduction. The founder of Crowdsite
realized that “we have developed too many features last year,” and they need
to “streamline processes to ensure the features are used.”70 Platforms need to
strip away complexity and excess process to narrow focus and increase
usability. Crowds want to be challenged by the co-creation task, not by technical or
organizational hurdles. They need clear procedures for participating in value
creation, including guidelines for creating products or designs, clear
evaluation criteria, and a reasonable selection process of the winning contributions.
Complexity could also lead to diseconomies of scale if the platform needs to
provide additional unscalable customer service.

        
Curation: When we think of crowdsourcing, we often assume that more is
better. However, the success of crowd ventures during the scaleup phase
is driven not solely by quantity, but rather by quality. The key curation
challenge is to balance open participation with quality control to avoid the
platform becoming loaded with poor quality. Crowdsourcing needs to yield
solutions that provide the outcome sought by the companies sponsoring
the challenges. However, in the idea category, businesses and analysts are
concerned that the approach fails to provide any competitive advantage.71
The problem of abundance also leads to “crowding” when clients of
crowdsourcing contests are overwhelmed by too many submissions given their
limited attention span and capacity to process information.72 Platforms need
to ensure that the curation mechanisms do not break down in the face of
increased creation activity. Internal quality control adds costs, slows down
the process, or misses the opportunity to engage the crowd in this
function. The trick is to craft curation mechanisms that provide the quality and
quantity of the value unit as well as being cost-efficient to ensure scalability.
Numerous platform leaders are considering reconfiguration of their
internal manual curation process through community-driven curation in light
of the increased volume of content. They find inspiration from platforms
that create feedback loops encouraging users to participate in reporting,
voting, or reviewing the core value unit. Ideally, the platform relies on a
self-policing community to ensure quality. However, relying on crowd
curation might be overwhelming for the community in the face of an
exponentially growing amount of output. Here is a telling example: Threadless users
were incentivized to evaluate a high number of designs in a very short time.
This monetary incentive skewed the actual assessment of designs.
Addressing the limits of explicit community-based voting, platforms are building-in
automation for quality control to separate the signal from the noise. One
approach is to draw upon implicit voting, resulting from actions such as
viewing, downloading, or buying an item to sort and filter the value units.
• Consumption: As we have seen, crowdsourcing platforms only function if there
is consumption. In addition to the tactics focused on attracting and retaining
clients, platforms need to manage the activities involved in this step of the
interaction process. Consumption typically starts with the call for crowd
contributions. Crowdsite provides an illustration of how to simplify this first step.
They reduced the friction during consumption by adding an option to call for
contributions in a short tweet format. This feature, called “shout,” quickly
attracted many new clients when it launched in 2016. In a recent update, the
founder told us that they plan to start charging for “shouts” because of the
strong demand. Does simplification bring risks? Absolutely. The outcome of
crowdsourcing is shaped by how the client defines the challenge brief. The
more complex the value unit, the more complicated it is to gather all the
requirements. For instance, 99designs adjusts the design briefs for their
product categories. Especially for R&D crowdsourcing sites, platforms invest a lot
of effort, time, and resources to help clients define the innovation challenge.
These costs need to be reduced for effective scaling. To tackle this challenge,
Topcoder, among others, seeks to productize the service of framing the
innovation task to tap into a larger market of smaller clients. They aim to move
away from constantly reinventing their service to fit unique needs of every
new client because “it is hard to experience any momentum when you are
always starting over.”73

      

      

        
Add New Interactions

        
Platforms that pursue this pathway seek to extend their core interaction
or add a completely new interaction. Crowdsourcing platforms are designed one
interaction at a time and start with one platform model. They expand over time
to embrace many kinds of interactions and create hybrid business models. For
instance, integrator platforms frequently add a two-sided platform component to
allow the direct connection of creators and customers. Local Motors, the
crowdbased motor vehicle manufacturing company, illustrates this path to scaling. The
company started with integrating the crowd input into their vehicle, which they
sold to customers. To expand their reach, they added interactions of a two-sided
platform to enable creators to directly interact with customers around a wide range
of other industrial products. This dual model is powerful: Local Motors’ Rally
Fighter car is co-created through an integrator model and sold more efficiently by
the company as a “reseller” rather than by many small sellers. The long tail
products of marketplaces are best sold by independent creators directly to consumers.74

        
Adding interactions provides revenue opportunities. Consider how
99designs added longer engagements through 1-to-1 projects, in addition to the
popular contest model. Clients can select a designer they want to work with
(perhaps one they identified through a crowd contest), specify a project, and pay the
creator. The company captures value through a transaction fee. This additional
interaction between existing creators and clients is currently the largest revenue
growth driver for the company. While adding additional interactions can help
platforms grow, it also increases a risk for too much complexity and a company’s costs
of operation. Notably, 99designs stopped other interactions like tasks (on-demand
short design tasks) or ready-made logos (clients choosing from an existing
collection of crowd-generated logos) to focus on their most effective interactions.
Similarly, 48hourslogo learned that adding web design as a value unit would have
required a new interaction because the contest model worked well for logos, but
was not effective for more complex design tasks. Thus, while adding interactions
could potentially help platforms grow, it also increases the risk of friction between
the different interactions, and thereby the platform’s costs of operation.

        
This path of adding interactions starts with two steps: identifying
interaction opportunities, and recognizing actors likely to benefit from this interaction.
Adding interactions can add new sides to a multi-sided platform. For their core
interaction, Mofilm represents a two-sided platform that connects filmmakers
with companies in need of content. The company is attempting to attract an
additional side: consumers of user-generated content. They launched Mosaic as a
channel to distribute the crowd-generated content to end-consumers. These
distribution channels create additional revenue opportunities by connecting brands
not only with creators of content, but also with consumers of content. For instance,
Airbnb hired a crowd member to produce a series of videos for the Mosaic travel
channel on YouTube. More sides lead to potentially larger cross-sided network
effects and the diversification of revenue sources for the platform.

        
While crowdsourcing, per definition, includes an open call, crowdsourcing
is making progress toward being more selective. Large-scale platforms are adding
more exclusive mechanisms in addition to the open contest model. Premium
challenges limit access in a contest. For selecting participants, 99designs’ use of
analytics is noteworthy: they collect data on all designers to make the matching of
designers with tasks quicker and better. Based on this rating, they identify a group
of 5,000 platinum designers with unique designs skills, who are invited to
participate in select contests. Another design contest platform brings highly qualified
participants to contests through a designer invitation prize. Clients can invite
particular designers to join the challenge. Mofilm charges premium prices for the
companies who seek to engage only the best creators in a contest. Creators’
chances to win are increased, and commissions are paid directly to them. This
avoids the best crowd members outgrowing their community.

      

      

        
Increase Value of Core Value Unit

        
While every platform needs curation to manage the quality and quantity
of the innovation outcome, improving the core value unit can itself be a viable
scaling strategy. With higher quality outcomes of the crowdsourcing process,
platforms can charge more or access a new market. Poptent realized that their users
are capable of not only producing videos for user-generated channels, but for
television ads. This allowed the platform to move up-market to offer a higher-priced
value unit for clients. Driving scaling by increasing the value of the value unit can
also expand the market by becoming viable for new types of customers. Producing
higher quality outcome has helped sites like Userfarm to transition from being
“regarded as something for amateurs, kids, or unprofessional people to an accepted
and respected art form in which real filmmakers are engaging.”75 Improving the
quality of the outcomes is 99designs’ top priority to tap into larger companies.
They are controlling the experience of their platform to have “more hits than
misses.”76 While the company established a strong brand within the startup
community for logo design, they need to ensure they can build trust among established
companies to crowdsource their design needs. Arcbazar succeeded in growing their
client’s trust and, thus, could increase their cut from the prize money, which also
continues to grow.

      

      

        
Extend to New Value Units

        
A crowdsourcing platform can hit the limits during expansion because it
is starting to bump up against the limits of the markets it serves. While initially,
crowd upstarts solve a pain point for a niche segment producing one type of
value unit, over time, they add new product categories to increase the
interaction frequency and attract new actors. Platforms need to decide whether to go
deep (vertical expansion) or broad (horizontal expansion). It is possible to
imagine arguments on both options. 99designs tackles this scaling lever by focusing
on design, but within this category, they are going deep. To transition from the
early adapters (startups) to the mass market (companies), they are
introducing categories that are relevant for the majority market. They realized that the
marketing channels were getting incrementally more expensive to get the next
customer in their current market. This observation triggered the decision to
look for segments they could target in a more profitable way: “We decided that
our bigger opportunity was going after an established business that had regular
design needs. To serve that market well, you need to have the quality and
consistency in place.”77 Fiverr, a competitor to 99designs, is adapting the horizontal
expansion strategy covering a broad range of tasks including design, writing,
and programming to be a one-stop shop for freelance services for entrepreneurs.
Companies need to be aware of the trade-offs in stretching their category. While
Tongal is open to include new technology trends like virtual reality, they stress
that by focusing on one category (video), they achieve a level of expertise they
can leverage to repeat the core interaction better than competitors. To decide
which value units to add, platforms need to listen carefully to the demand of
clients as well as market trends. NineSigma leverages a client advisory board
to guide their decisions about which additional value units to add. Userfarm
embraces emerging technologies to generate new value units. Their recent
challenges on vertical video attracted brands such as Audi and Nespresso. Userfarm’s
chief marketing officer reports that this scaling strategy has “lead to
substantial network growth both in amateur filmmakers, used to filming in this style
and possessing the technology required, and in experienced filmmakers
stimulated by the challenge of the new format.” Because the trend is grassroots, it
is particularly effective to “attract many filmmakers who otherwise would be
excluded by the traditional production processes and vested interests wedded
to landscape format filmmaking.”78 For Topcoder, the choice of value units also
followed the technology evolution. They initially focused on data science and
programming challenges. In 2006, the platform added graphic design challenges
as an extension of the type of problems they are solving. Platforms choosing this
scaling path need to attract new creators with the required skills, which
underlines that the strategies are linked.

      

    

      
Conclusion

      
The crowdsourcing platforms highlighted in different industries have
different platform models and operate in different contexts. However, they
share a problem faced by all crowdsourcing sites: how can we scale our
platform effectively? The framework for scaling paths combines actors,
interactions, and value units to make a number of distinct strategic moves available.
It helps to identify, select, and sequence approaches to scaling. For each scaling
path, platforms need to facilitate value-creating interactions of platform actors
to produce the value unit. Successful crowdsourcing platforms remove the
friction from their interactions as well as add additional value-creating
interactions. The interactions facilitated on crowdsourcing platforms must generate
access value to allow for value capture. While crowd ventures initially have
one revenue stream, as they scale, they develop multiple and
complementary sources of income. Consider the case of Fiverr. As the name implies, they
started with $5 gigs as the value unit. By adding additional interactions,
creators today have their own stores offering diverse packages of services with
different price ranges to provide the best possible solution to their customers.
This increased the quality and value of their platform, and as a result,
quadrupled revenue. Fiverr and the other cases discussed in this article illustrate how
crowdsourcing ventures need to identify new interactions and improve existing
ones to scale up their platform.

      
Author Biography
Thomas Kohler is Associate Professor at Hawaii Pacific University, Visiting
Professor at Jönköping International Business School, and Visiting Scholar at
University of Innsbruck (email: tkohler@hpu.edu).

      
Notes

    
